=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

virt-qemu-run - run a standalone QEMU guest

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<virt-qemu-run> [I<OPTIONS>...] [I<GUEST-XML>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This tool provides a way to run a standalone QEMU guest such that it
is completely independant of libvirtd. It makes use of the embedded
QEMU driver support to run the VM placing files under an isolated
directory tree. When the guest is run with this tool it is invisible
to libvirtd and thus also invisible to other libvirt tools such as
virsh.

The virt-qemu-run program will run the QEMU virtual machine, and then
block until the guest OS shuts down, at which point it will exit.

If the virt-qemu-run program is interrupted (eg Ctrl-C) it will
immediately terminate the virtual machine without giving the guest
OS any opportunity to gracefully shutdown.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item C<GUEST-XML>

The full path to the XML file describing the guest virtual machine
to be booted.

=item C<-h>, C<--help>

Display the command line help

=item C<-v>, C<--verbose>

Display verbose information about startup

=item C<-r DIR>, C<--root=DIR>

Specify the root directory to use for storing state associated with
the virtual machine. The caller is responsible for deleting this
directory when it is no longer required.

If this parameter is omitted, then a random temporary directory
will be created, and its contents be automaticlaly deleted at
VM shutdown.

=item C<-s XML-FILE,VALUE-FILE> C<--secret=XML-FILE,VALUE-FILE>

Specify a secret to be loaded into the secret driver. The C<XML-FILE>
is a path to the XML description of the secret, whose UUID should
match a secret referenced in the guest domain XML. The C<VALUE-FILE>
is a path containing the raw value of the secret.

=back

=head1 EXIT STATUS

Upon successful shutdown, an exit status of 0 will be set. Upon
failure a non-zero status will be set.

=head1 AUTHOR

Daniel P. Berrangé

=head1 BUGS

Report any bugs discovered to the libvirt community via the
mailing list L<https://libvirt.org/contact.html> or bug tracker
L<https://libvirt.org/bugs.html>.
Alternatively report bugs to your software distributor / vendor.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2019 by Red Hat, Inc.

=head1 LICENSE

virt-run-qemu is distributed under the terms of the GNU LGPL v2+.
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions. There
is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<virsh(1)>

=cut
